Add Trino 446 release notes (#21753)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-446.md

# Release 446 (29 Apr 2024)

## General

* Improve performance of `INSERT` statements into partitioned tables when the
  `retry_policy` configuration property is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`21661 `)
* Reduce delay before killing queries when the cluster runs out of memory. ({issue}`21719`)
* Fix `CREATE CATALOG` statements including quotes in catalog names. ({issue}`21399`)
* Fix potential query failure when a column name ends with a `:`. ({issue}`21676`)
* Fix potential query failure when a [SQL routine](/routines) contains a label
  reference in a `LEAVE`, `ITERATE`, `REPEAT`, or `WHILE` statement. ({issue}`21682`)

> * Fix query failure when [SQL routines](/routines) use special functions such as

Reviewer: They are not regular functions (they are treated as “special forms” in row expressions). There may be others that are affected, but I didn’t check the whole code. But yes, we can remove “special” as it doesn’t mean anything to a user.

> * Fix query failure when [SQL routines](/routines) use special functions such as

Reviewer 2: I think that: BETWEEN, IN, NULL_IF, SWITCH are affected as they are accessing operator dependencies from `SpecialForm` class. We can call them out all

  `NULLIF` or `BETWEEN`. ({issue}`19820`)
* Fix potential query failure due to worker nodes running out of memory in
  concurrent scenarios. ({issue}`21706`)

## BigQuery connector

* {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.
  `--add-opens=java.base/java.nio=ALL-UNNAMED` must be added to`jvm-config`. ({issue}`21580`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Fix failure when reading from Azure file storage and the schema, table, or
  column name contains non-alphanumeric characters. ({issue}`21586`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading a partitioned table with a

>   [deletion vector](https://docs.databricks.com/en/delta/deletion-vectors.html). ({issue}`21737`)

Reviewer 3: I would recommend using OSS Delta page. https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-deletion-vectors.html

## Hive connector

* Add support for reading S3 objects restored from Glacier storage. ({issue}`21164`)
* Fix failure when reading from Azure file storage and the schema, table, or
  column name contains non-alphanumeric characters. ({issue}`21586`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for the [Snowflake catalog](iceberg-snowflake-catalog). ({issue}`19362`)
* Automatically use `varchar` as a type during table creation when `char` is
  specified. ({issue}`19336`, ({issue}`21515`)
* Deprecate the `schema` and `table` arguments for the `table_changes` function
  in favor of `schema_name` and `table_name`, respectively. ({issue}`21698`)
* Prevent assigning null values to non-null columns as part of a `MERGE`

>   statement. ({issue}`21619`)

Reviewer 3: The PR fixed the engine, not Iceberg connector. I think all connectors supporting MERGE statement & NOT NULL constraints are affected?

* Fix failure when executing the `migrate` procedure with partitioned Hive
  tables on Glue. ({issue}`21391`)
* Fix failure when reading from Azure file storage and the schema, table, or
  column name contains non-alphanumeric characters. ({issue}`21586`)

## Pinot connector

> * Fix query failure when a predicate contains a single `'` or `"`. ({issue}`21681`)

Reviewer 3: Remove `"`. Also, the issue happens even when several `'` exist.

# Release 446 (29 Apr 2024)

## General

* Improve performance of `INSERT` statements into partitioned tables when the
  `retry_policy` configuration property is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`21661 `)
* Reduce delay before stopping queries when the cluster runs out of memory. ({issue}`21719`)

> * Fix catalog names including `"` marks when creating them with `CREATE CATALOG`

Reviewer 4: What do you mean by fixing the name? Disallow that? Or somehow change it?

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/21753#discussion_r1583848509

> * Fix catalog names including `"` marks when creating them with `CREATE CATALOG`

Author: It doesn't fail, it just... includes a " in the catalog name when it shouldn't. This is about adding normalization. Maybe...

Fix `CREATE CATALOG` statements including quotes in catalog names.

  statements. ({issue}`21399`)
* Fix query failure when a token in a query ends with a `:`. ({issue}`21676`)
* Fix potential query failure for queries using [SQL routines](/routines) with

>   the `LEAVE`, `ITERATE`, `REPEAT`, or `WHILE` labels. ({issue}`21682`)

Reviewer 4: those are not labels .. you can place labels with them though.. so need reword probably

> * Fix potential query failure for queries using [SQL routines](/routines) that

Reviewer 4: can this be more specific?

  invoke other functions. ({issue}`19820`)
* Fix potential query failure due to worker nodes running out of memory in
  concurrent scenarios. ({issue}`21706`)

> * Fix non-propagation of OpenTelemetry tracing context when invoking a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fix non-propagation of OpenTelemetry tracing context to connector plugins.
```

Reviewer 4: Or even just "to connectors."

  connector. ({issue}`21575`)

## BigQuery connector

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: This is due to an apache arrow requirement. There is no workaround for it as far as I know. The same applies to snowflake connector which is using Arrow as well.

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 3: The context is we want to remove another Avro serialization eventually since it's slower than Arrow and keeping both code requires maintenance costs.

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/java/install.html#java-compatibility

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer: That’s a big problem. It means that those libraries are using internal JDK APIs that may disappear at any point.

Depending on such behavior may make it hard or impossible to update to new Java versions in the future. In the worst case, we may need to update to the next major Java version to fix security issues and be forced to break those connectors.

We did a lot of work when migrating to Java 11 to avoid having to use internal Java APIs to be where we are today. This is a step backwards.

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: I agree but the alternative being FFM based allocator is not yet there

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/38016

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: I've added an FFM based AllocationManager on top of the JDK 22 PR and it works but Arrow still needs an `--add-opens` because `org.apache.arrow.memory.util.MemoryUtil` uses `Unsafe`.

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/21776

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer: Unsafe doesn't require add-opens. Are they using something else?

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer: Does Arrow use native memory? If so, how are we advising users to configure Trino when part of the host memory needs to be reserved for off-heap buffers?

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: @martint yes it does and it's been problematic for some time

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer: Let's go ahead with the release for now and we can revisit whether we want to revert this once we have alignment in the next couple of days.

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 5: Why do we have to give arrow native memory?  It is impossible for it to use heap memory?  Is this code pulling in native libraries also?

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 5: Actually, we fork arrow to use heap memory.  I have no idea why they think they need native memory

> * {{breaking}} Enable `bigquery.arrow-serialization.enabled` by default.

Reviewer 2: @dain native - no. ArrowBuf allocates and uses off heap memory. The idea is to allow to pass vectors to other languages but that's not an actual case in these connectors

>   `--add-opens=java.base/java.nio=ALL-UNNAMED` must be added to`jvm-config`. ({issue}`21580`)

Reviewer 4: Requires ... in jvm config

Reviewer 4: Also .., need to make sure this is in the docs

## Delta Lake connector

* Fix query failure when querying Azure file storage with special characters in
  a schema, table, or column name. ({issue}`21586`)

> * Fix incorrect results with a deletion vector on a partitioned table. ({issue}`21737`)

Reviewer 4: whats a deletion vector? 

is this maybe correct:

when deleting data on a partitioned table.

> * Fix incorrect results with a deletion vector on a partitioned table. ({issue}`21737`)

Reviewer 3: SELECT statement.

## Hive connector

* Add support for reading S3 objects restored from Glacier storage. ({issue}`21164`)
* Fix query failure when querying Azure file storage with special characters in
  a schema, table, or column name. ({issue}`21586`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for the [Snowflake catalog](iceberg-snowflake-catalog). ({issue}`19362`)
* Automatically use `varchar` as a type during table creation when `char` is
  specified. ({issue}`19336`, ({issue}`21515`)
* Deprecate the `schema` and `table` arguments for the `table_changes` function
  in favor of `schema_name` and `table_name`, respectively. ({issue}`21698`)

> * Prevent assigning `null` values to non-null columns as part of a `MERGE`

Reviewer 4: I think since you use non-null .. you should also just use null without apostrophes

  statement. ({issue}`21619`)
* Fix failure when executing the `migrate` procedure with partitioned Hive
  tables on Glue. ({issue}`21391`)
* Fix query failure when querying Azure file storage with special characters in
  a schema, table, or column name. ({issue}`21586`)

## Pinot connector

> * Fix query failure when the query predicate contains a single `'` or `"`. ({issue}`21681`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fix query failure when a predicate contains a single `'` or `"`. ({issue}`21681`)
```

## Snowflake connector

* Add support for the `unsupported-type-handling` and
  `jdbc-types-mapped-to-varchar` type mapping configuration properties. ({issue}`21528`)

## SPI

* Remove support for `@RemoveInput` as an annotation for aggregation functions.

>   A `WindowAggregation` can be declared in `@AggregationFunction` instead, and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  A `WindowAggregation` can be declared in `@AggregationFunction` instead, which
```

>   this supports input removal. ({issue}`21349`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  supports input removal. ({issue}`21349`)
```

* Extend `QueryCompletionEvent` with various aggregated, per-stage, per-task
  distribution statistics. New information is available in

>   `QueryCompletedEvent.statistics.taskStatistics`. ({issue}`21694`)

Reviewer 4: what is that? A JMX metric? A system metadata? Both?

# Release 446 (1 May 2024)

## General

* Improve performance of `INSERT` statements into partitioned tables when the
  `retry_policy` configuration property is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`21661 `)
* Improve performance of queries with complex grouping operations.  ({issue}`21726`)
* Reduce delay before killing queries when the cluster runs out of memory. ({issue}`21719`)
* Prevent assigning null values to non-null columns as part of a `MERGE`
  statement. ({issue}`21619`)
* Fix `CREATE CATALOG` statements including quotes in catalog names. ({issue}`21399`)
* Fix potential query failure when a column name ends with a `:`. ({issue}`21676`)
* Fix potential query failure when a [SQL routine](/routines) contains a label
  reference in a `LEAVE`, `ITERATE`, `REPEAT`, or `WHILE` statement. ({issue}`21682`)

> * Fix query failure when [SQL routines](/routines) use the `NULLIF`, `IN`,

Reviewer: "IN" and "SWITCH" are not user-visible functions. IN is a SQL construct (`x IN (...)`), and SWITCH is used to implement CASE expressions.
